---
layout: post
title: the ladder 
---

useful resource: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idealization

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wittgenstein's_ladder

ancient greek: κλιμαξ
pronounced as ki-li-max spelt as klimax

also see https://medium.com/praxis-blog/meta-skills-macro-laws-and-the-power-of-constraints-4f0e2d2d6d60#.gnfiy1lw8

where he uses the crutch - guide - springboard model

It’s been noted that the best writers know the rules of writing well enough to break them in creative ways. The rules in this way are more than rules. In the beginning, they are crutches. Later, they become guides and useful defaults. Eventually, they become springboards. They crystallize the moments where a writer has to decide what she believes, who she isn’t, and by process of elimination, who she is.

This is the same role, I believe, that “tips and habits” play in productivity: rules that are designed to be broken in a journey of self-discovery. They resist a little bit, asking “Are you sure you want to choose your own adventure?” Which is helpful, because many times you shouldn’t. This changing role makes it irrelevant whether a piece of productivity advice is “right” or “wrong.” What matters is how fruitful of a domain it circumscribes, and thus whether it’s worth the effort to redesign it. It’s not important whether you “believe in it” or not, but whether you can articulate how it fits (or doesn’t) within your personal system of truths.
This is all another way of saying, “The opposite of every great truth is also true.” 

But with an asterisk: as long as you know thyself well enough to understand how it is true for you. An ounce of self-knowledge is worth a ton of productivity advice, in this respect, because it starts to reveal this mirror-image landscape of performance.
The catch, of course, is that you can’t proceed directly to self-knowledge. It may be stored in the form of abstract principles, but you still need the individual lessons. You may live your life according to highly compressed algorithms, but you still need the raw data. It’s only by comparing them that you know your algorithm is maximally compressed, not just incomplete.

