---
layout: post
title: Mental maps
---


Story abt army map
All maps are useful
The map is not the terrain

All we have are maps
[models are useful quote by George Box]

There is an awesome blog about mental models called Farnham street. There is also a pretty cool course on models on Coursera taught by xx which I took before and highly recommend.

But this post is not about models. Or at least not just about models. 

I want to begin and end this post from a higher vantage point.

## maps

I want to talk about mental maps. First I begin with an actual map.

[ mrt map ]

This is a map of the train stations of Singapore, the city I live in.

This map is useful for navigating within the MRT system.

So if I want to use this map for anything else other than navigating the MRT system, the map is definitely not useful.

[] another map ]

Here's another map of Singapore. Can you say that one map is more correct than the other? Can you say that one map captures more reality than the other? 

[] another map ]

To talk about correctness about maps is a grave mistake. I remember when I was serving my time in the army (in Singapore, there's a system for citizens to serve for 2 years as full time soldiers) I took part in a navigational exercise.

According to the map I was given, I was supposed to see a fork about 400 metres from the starting point. I saw a fork about 200 metres earlier than expected.

I panicked. How could the map be wrong? I thought.

I paced back and forth between the starting point and the fork to check whether I made a mistake in calculating the distance. I refused to walk ahead of the fork to double check because I feared making a mistake and getting irretrievably lost in the forest.

Other teams decided to just continue regardless. 

Finally, after wasting 30 mins second guessing myself, I decided to continue ahead as if this fork wasn't there. 

200 metres later, I came across the very same fork I expected to see based on the map. Then, I realised that the map was cruelly outdated. And my blind faith that the map is always right cost me unnecessary anxiety.

I never forgot that lesson. Not to blindly trust the map I was given. But I never extend that lesson to other areas in my life till now.

In life, we operate with all kinds of maps. Except we don't call them maps. We call them mental models. Frames. Mindsets. Perspectives. I want to group all these under one giant mental map. (See what I did there?)